Hi there, I'm Tom Peperkamp,
a platform product owner.
That's right, platforms
should be treated as products!
Platform Engineering is a
new and rapidly evolving field.
To help you navigate this space,
I've created a video series that dives into
the why, what, and how of Platform Engineering.
This series pulls together insights
from top quality public resources,
organizing them into focused topics to create
a "crash course" in Platform Engineering.
Each video is curated to support
your Platform Engineering journey,
offering practical knowledge and insights to deepen
your understanding of its principles and potential.
Let's get started!
Throughout my talk, I'll be referencing
content from leading voices in our industry.
A big shout out to these rock stars for
their amazing blogs and conference talks!
You'll find all the sources
listed at the end of the video.
These references
aren't just for ethics.
They're packed with valuable insights
that I highly recommend exploring.
So if you enjoy this video,
definitely check them
out and dive deeper!
Welcome back, everyone!
Today, we're focusing on a crucial
tool for modern software development:
the Internal Developer
Platform, or IDP for short.
Imagine a world where developers
can self-serve everything they need.
Environments, deployments, databases,
observability without waiting on other teams.
This is the power of an IDP:
a developer -centric platform that transforms how teams
engage with the organization's delivery configuration,
driving autonomy and speed.
In this episode,
the longest and most
technical episode of the series,
we'll not only define what
an IDP is,
but also explore the available design
patterns that shape these platforms.
Are you ready to join me on my
search for understandable models
to guide essential
stakeholder conversations?
This video follows up
on my previous video,
"Why Platform Engineering is
the Natural Evolution of DevOps."
If you haven't seen it yet,
go check it out!
In that one, we talked about how
Platform Engineering helps developers
deal with the crazy complexity
of modern software delivery.
It's all about making things simpler by
abstracting away complex infrastructure.
Remember, we talked about
how a full-stack DevOps approach
isn't always enough in today's
complex operational landscape.
The solution lies in
reducing cognitive load,
a central idea we explored through the
lens of Platform Engineering product teams,
backed by Team
Topologies concepts.
By enabling developers to focus on delivering
value rather than dealing with complexity,
platforms become the foundation
of successful organizations.
We defined Platform Engineering as a
'way of thinking' and 'team-of-teams design'.
This summary from Weaveworks,
a cloud-native pioneer that
unfortunately closed shop early 2024,
paints a more detailed picture.
Now, first, let's find out how
Platform Engineering differs from IDPs,
and how these terms
relate to the each other.
We'll use Microsoft's
introduction to
'start right, stay
right, and get right'
as a 'right start' for this video.
Why? Because it puts DevEx at
the center of Platform Engineering.
Microsoft describes Platform
Engineering in their white paper
as 'a movement that improves the experience
of developers and supporting teams.'
Microsoft also uses the words "practice" and "a
cultural shift" to describe Platform Engineering.
Platform teams offer
developers a curated set of
tools, capabilities, and processes
to 'start right, stay right, and get right'.
To start right,
developers need easy access to tools and systems
that comply with organizational requirements.
They stay right through
automated governance and policy.
To get right, the organization needs to
think of developers as an internal customer
and look for ways to
improve their experience.
Let's try to connect some dots.
Platform Engineering is a movement,
a practice, an approach, a cultural shift,
a way of thinking with
DevEx as the focus.
Platform teams offer platforms to
developers as internal customers.
'Platforms to developers
as internal customers...'
Shuffle this a bit and we have
an Internal Developer Platform!
This visualization provides a nice introduction
to what capabilities an IDP brings,
but I'm pretty sure that you're
here for something less conceptual.
So let's dive into that!
Sometimes, it's easier to
say what something isn't.
So first things first:
An IDP is *not* just a
wrapper around a cloud service.
Is that controversial?
I think not.
Although leveraging cloud services effectively
is a key component of a successful IDP,
IDPs are not about enabling operators
to do the things they already do.
IDPs are about enabling developers to
do the things they're not expert in doing.
Internal Developer
Platforms mean enablement.
IDPs streamline processes,
increase productivity,
and enhance developer experience by enforcing
standardization and enabling self-service.
They positively impact key
DevOps and DevEx metrics.
Wrappers don't do that.
Also, Kubernetes is *not* an IDP.
Kubernetes is an abstraction
on the infrastructure
that helps automate many important
but mundane and labor-intensive tasks
that were being done by many teams across
the industry over and over and over again.
Kubernetes provides a container
-centric management environment.
It orchestrates computing, networking, and
storage infrastructure on behalf of user workloads.
This provides much of the simplicity
of Platform as a Service (PaaS),
with the flexibility of
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS),
and enables portability
across infrastructure providers.
That's all great,
but it's not an IDP.
Organizations should build IDPs on top of this
Kubernetes layer to reduce developers' cognitive load,
instead of shifting left the immense
cognitive load of cloud-native Ops to developers.
In the words of
Kelsey Hightower:
'Kubernetes is a platform
for building platforms.'
'It's a better place to
start, not the endgame.'
Now, it's time to build those platforms
on top of the Kubernetes platform.
So today, we'll unlock the
power of Platform Engineering
and discover the key to faster innovation and streamlined
development with Internal Developer Platforms (IDPs).
So, what is an IDP?
Let's start with a Container
Solutions blog post by Cari Liebenberg.
She gives us two starting
definitions to consider.
We start with Martin Fowler's often
cited definition of a digital platform.
And Humanitec has this definition
of the Internal Developer Platform (IDP):
'An Internal Developer Platform,
or IDP, is a self-service layer
that allows developers to interact independently
with their organization's delivery setup,
enabling them to self-serve
environments, deployments, databases, logs,
and anything else they
need to run their applications.'
Cari Liebenberg builds on
these definitions and states:
'An Internal Developer Platform (IDP) can be seen
as a specific implementation of a digital platform,
offering self-service functionality as a
product to meet a variety of a team's needs.
The focus for an Internal Developer
Platform is improving the release process
that teams need to
follow to release software.'
Sounds good, right?
We'll have a look at how the release process of modern
teams look like and what these teams might need later.
Now that we know what an
IDP isn't, and how we define it,
let's see what one
actually looks like.
Developers usually interact with IDPs
using APIs, CLIs, and web-based portals
that provide access to
the platform's capabilities.
One example is Backstage, an
open source platform by Spotify.
It helps create Internal Developer Portals,
which are like a one-stop shop for developers
to access and manage all their software,
tools, documentation, and services.
Another example is Port.
Unlike Backstage, which is
opinionated in its structure,
Port's blueprint approach allows
greater flexibility for customization.
It launched in 2022 and has seen rapid
early adoption due to its open nature.
This is not necessarily an
Internal Developer *Platform*.
What you see here is an
Internal Developer *Portal*.
Developer portals are the first
touchpoint, but they are not your IDP.
Let's have a closer look at the differences
between Internal Developer Platforms and Portals.
First, the platform.
An Internal Developer
Platform is a thing,
a product people use to do Platform
Engineering, built by Platform Teams.
An Internal Developer Portal is a component
of an Internal Developer Platform.
It's a single pane of glass
for "ClickOps" and visibility.
By the way, while Backstage
from our first portal example
is essentially like a toolbox that gives you the
components to build your ideal developer portal,
Port can be more
than just a portal;
it's a ready-made solution with a
focus on infrastructure management.
It's the Internal Developer Platform that reduces
the cognitive load on engineers, developer toil,
and manual work, not the service catalog
or the developer portal on top of it.
Without actual self-service offerings, a
portal is just a "Wizard-of-Oz" experiment,
with no more value
than "TicketOps".
And couldn't we better focus on managing those services
instead of managing requests from people to do something?
Building the house first doesn't mean you
can't think of the door, the portal. yet.
A wireframe or mock-up can help with decisions
about structure and with roadmap conversations.
For example, you can access
the Backstage UI kit in Figma
to duplicate your own version and play around
with a fitting homepage for your own organization.
Now, let's have a look at the
capabilities and benefits of an actual IDP.
What's behind the portal?
IDPs provide a service layer that abstracts the complexities
of application configuration and infrastructure management.
They are the automation
and abstraction of modern Ops.
Remember from our previous
discussion on Platform Engineering,
the goal is to reduce
cognitive load for developers.
IDPs achieve this by abstracting the complexities of
application configuration and infrastructure management,
allowing developers to focus on writing code and
autonomously delivering high-quality applications.
The very same Kelsey Hightower,
a Kubernetes thought leader,
gave the opening
keynote at "KubeCon 2017".
In his inspiring talk,
seven years ago,
he already suggested this abstraction
layer to avoid noise for developers.
Kelsey Hightower demonstrated a developer
flow free of any 'implementation details'.
In a spot-on article on Cloud Native Now,
justin Reock cited, again, Kelsey Hightower:
'Kubernetes is not a
tool for developers.
They can use it, but Kubernetes is low-level infrastructure
and works best when people do not know it is there.'
Today, we are often in
the opposite situation.
Many developers are painfully
aware Kubernetes is there.
If done right, Kubernetes would become
invisible and just an implementation detail.
"Git push" over "kubectl apply".
Do your developers have to write
YAMLs and use kubectl to do their work?
(And what do they think of that?)
What does the developer
workflow actually look like?
A modern developer's
workflow has three major stages:
Code, Merge (or Ship), and Run.
To elaborate on that, what might a modern
team need to release software in the cloud?
The aforementioned blog by Cari
Liebenberg gives us some clues.
To name some capabilities,
a team probably needs:
a repository to store code,
pipelines that will run
when code is updated,
automated scans that run when
the pipeline runs, which might include:
security checks; code quality
checks; and running tests,
and the creation of
ephemeral environments.
In addition to the release
process is the run model;
that is, where will the
application run and be maintained?
This in turn leads to needing
infrastructure for running the software.
The infrastructure
layers to consider include:
networking: How is traffic
handled? What traffic is allowed?
What ports should be accessible? What
should be public, what should be private?
Compute: Is the team using VMs,
containers, or going Serverless?
Storage: Where is
the data going to live?
How is the data going to remain secure?
What and who can access the data?
Observability: What is
happening across your solution?
Who is accessing your systems,
and what changes are being made?
How healthy are your systems?
How well are your systems performing?
What alerts will help your team?
Security:
What access control is in place?
What checks and scans
for security vulnerabilities?
That's a lot of 'shifted left' Ops stuff
that Devs now have to worry about!
IDPs to the rescue.
An IDP not only supports the Run stage,
freeing developers from the ops burden,
but also supports the
Code and Merge stages.
It provides technical documentation,
templates, CI/CD pipelines,
roles and permissions,
and other essential tools.
This comprehensive support streamlines
the entire development process,
enabling developers to focus on writing code
and delivering high-quality applications.
To dive deeper into the stages of Code, Merge
and Run, let's look at this Gartner diagram.
The diagram breaks down the capabilities
of the IDP into three key stages:
Discover and Create, Integrate and
Deploy, and Operate and Improve.
Do you see how these three
stages match with Code-Merge-Run?
In the Discover
and Create stage,
an IDP can support developers with capabilities
such as documentation, templates, and IDEs.
These tools help streamline
the initial coding process,
ensuring that developers have everything
they need to start building efficiently.
Moving to the Integrate
and Deploy stage,
The IDP can provide CI/CD
pipelines, infrastructure automation, etc.
These capabilities ensure that code changes
are seamlessly integrated and deployed,
reducing the risk of errors and
speeding up the delivery process.
Finally, in the Operate and Improve stage, the IDP
can offer monitoring, logging, and other capabilities
that help maintain the health
of applications in production
and provide valuable insights
for continuous improvement.
By unifying these disparate
platform capabilities,
an IDP not only takes care of the
traditional Ops domain, the Run stage,
but also provides comprehensive support throughout
the entire software development lifecycle.
This holistic approach
enables developers
to focus on delivering high quality
applications with greater speed and efficiency.
It's important to note that IDPs can indeed cover
the full spectrum, but not necessarily do so.
It's a collaborative journey together
with the platform users, the developers.
More on this journey in my
"Platform-as-a-Product" video,
where I cover the "Thinnest
Viable Platform" (TVP) subject.
The IDP as an abstraction layer allows
developers to self-serve the resources they need
to build, test, deploy, and monitor
applications with minimal friction.
IDPs are designed to maximize
software delivery throughput.
The goal of an IDP is to enable developers to focus on
writing code and delivering high-quality applications
without having to worry about the underlying
infrastructure setup and maintenance.
An internal developer platform should be built
to eventually cover these core self -service,
I repeat, self
-service, capabilities:
Cloud Infrastructure
Orchestration;
Role-Based Access Management;
Application Configuration
Management;
Deployment Management.
(plus Environment Management);
and Application Observability,
to enable that goal.
One more time for
the people in the back:
Platform capabilities = self-service.
Self-service with guardrails.
Now, let's look at some real
-world examples of what that means.
Internal Developer Platforms
enhance the developer experience
by streamlining "Day 1"
and "Day 2" operations.
Provided self-service capabilities should cover both
initial setup tasks ("Day 1")
and automating ongoing development
and maintenance processes ("Day 2").
It's a pitfall to only
focus on "Day 1";
"Day 2" is where developers
spend most of the time.
Here's an overview of some "Day 1"
and "Day 2" operations examples,
but I won't dive into
this level of detail today.
This one is for
the Marketing folks.
From a user perspective,
an IDP that takes care of
both "Day 1" and "Day 2" operations
Provides a "platformless" experience,
enabling developers, data scientists
and others to focus on code and innovation.
Platformless allows developers to
streamline their development process
and concentrate on building
apps that deliver value to users.
This doesn't mean
platforms won't exist;
it means that the complexities of a platform don't need
to be handled by application developers.
Instead, the IDP provides a seamless
or transparent platform experience.
'Do not leak your implementation details
into the developer workflow', remember?
The suffix "-less" in tech signifies a
shift towards increased simplicity
and a more user
-centric design approach.
Less, as in: without the burden.
"Platformless", the realistic and
sustainable version of "NoOps".
We talked about
the "why" of platforms,
and we've looked from different perspectives
at the benefits, the "what" of IDPs.
It's time to describe
"how" an IDP looks like.
'A picture is worth a
thousand words', right?
What we need is a blueprint, something to
kick-start conversations and explain our IDP.
Without a visualized reference,
it's difficult for the Platform Engineers and Product
Owner (or Product Manager) to avoid misunderstandings.
And it also helps the Platform Team
with their stakeholder communications.
And there are more benefits.
Some kind of high-level architecture or
model also helps to clarify boundaries.
Think of the AWS Shared Responsibility Model
(more on shared responsibility models later).
Now, let's try to find a suitable
blueprint for our IDP conversations!
This graphic from the Cloud Native Computing
Foundation (CNCF) "Platform Engineering" whitepaper
illustrates the relationships between
products, platforms, and capability providers.
The direction of consumption
in this diagram is top-down,
showing how capabilities are
consumed by platform interfaces,
which are which in turn are
consumed by product teams.
I think this graphic can certainly serve
as a reference and conversation starter,
but not the one to translate
the "what" of IDPs into a "how".
What other options do we have?
This picture is from
internaldeveloperplatform.org,
an educational hub to
promote IDP principles.
It illustrates how an IDP
connects infrastructure,
application configurations, application
configurations, and the management of environments.
The illustration is limited to the
environment management capability
and doesn't cover
the full IDP scope.
Conclusion: not suitable for
a broader conversation. Next!
One of my favorite YouTube
channels is "DevOps Toolkit".
Check out Viktor Farcic explaining
the parts of an IDP in this screenshot.
Key takeaway: 'All those things are
tailor-made for specific developer needs.'
This implies that our architecture should
support a high level of customization.
The illustration in this
video is informative;
It tells us the role of an IDP as the bridge between
the desired state (code) and the actual state.
But it lacks the structure to
paint all IDP building blocks.
Let's move on!
Viktor Farcic's statement that IDPs
are tailor-made is supported by Gartner:
'Don't expect to buy
a turnkey platform.'
We'll evaluate a more extended
platform diagram from Gartner later,
but before we move on, please take note of
the automation emphasis in this version here.
This diagram, from a blog on the Equinix
website, illustrates some of the capabilities
typically found in IDPs to simplify and streamline
the software development lifecycle (or SDLC).
The author, James Walker, emphasizes that successful
platforms must be flexible and scalable enough
to support your development operations without
compromising on security or compliance.
This requires platforms to support
all the technologies you're using,
including hybrid and on-prem environments,
in addition to your cloud resources.
Although the blog post is
extensive and a valuable resource,
and I do like to focus on the different
roles interacting with the platform,
I think the illustration is
too limited in its structure.
Back to Gartner.
This diagram is what we
can expect from Gartner:
High-level and abstract, designed to present a
conceptual model rather than granular, actionable details.
The strength of this diagram lies in
how it shows that an IDP isn't mandatory;
reusable IaaS and PaaS components are also directly
available to product and service teams as X-as-a-Service.
A powerful representation, but unfortunately
not the level of abstraction we're looking for.
I think we can stop searching; this is
what a true platform blueprint looks like!
McKinsey presented this blueprint
at PlatformCon 2023 in their talk,
"Platform as Code: Simplifying Developer
Platform Design with Reference Architectures".
This architectural blueprint,
with its five main planes,
is a great conversation starter
for a wide variety of stakeholders.
Let's have a closer look at
the planes that make up an IDP.
The blueprint has five "planes":
Developer Control Plane: this is the primary configuration
layer and interaction point for the platform users.
Components include APIs,
CLIs, and web-based portals.
Integration and Delivery Plane:
contains the tools that build, store, configure, and
deploy requests coming from the Developer Control Plane.
Resource Plane: contains all resource
components necessary to run the app.
Monitoring and Logging Plane: Provides real-time
metrics and logs for apps and infrastructure.
Security Plane: manages secrets and
identity to protect sensitive information.
How awesome would it be if we
could relate our product backlog items
to the corresponding
planes on the blueprint?
This graphic by the team
from PlatformEngineering.org
presents well-known tools from the cloud-native tooling landscape, plotted on the five planes.
Isn't the structure
great? I certainly think so!
But how do we know
which tools to select?
There's so much choice!
And there's a whole lot more
in the cloud-native toolbox.
This overview from the CNCF
shows just how much is out there.
It can be a maze for developers,
but it's a candy store for Ops folks!
Platform teams can "Pick
& Mix" in the Ops candy store.
Like Viktor Farcic said earlier, IDPs are
'tailor-made for specific developer needs.'
It's important to note that it's the Platform Team that carefully selects
and integrates this curated set of tools, capabilities, and processes,
packaged for easy consumption, ensuring they fit well
together and align with the organization's standards.
This careful picking is precisely to avoid the
risk of fragmented or incompatible toolchains.
The goal is to create a cohesive, efficient, and user
-friendly platform that supports developers in their work.
This requires a product mindset,
where the platform team continuously
iterates and improves the platform
based on developer feedback.
The subject of a product mindset is covered
in a separate "Platform-as-a-Product" video.
Instead of doing your
own "picking & mixing",
you can also start with
predefined configurations.
There are open-sourced reference architectures
available for different platforms.
Here's an example of an IDP reference
architecture based on OpenShift
that outlines the five planes of the
blueprint we've discussed earlier.
How might this architecture
fit into your existing workflows?
Another example, designed
around Azure services.
Now that we've seen reference
architectures as examples,
let's explore how you
can use them practically.
Humanitec doesn't only offer open
-sourced reference architectures,
they also enable you to fork the
code for the full IDP implementation,
including learning
path, and a whitepaper.
You can start setting up an IDP yourself easily,
with the open-sourced reference architectures.
Fork the code for the
full IDP implementation,
explore the learning path, and
check the accompanying whitepaper.
I highly encourage you to discover and explore
some of the available reference architectures.
Or use the available Google Slides presentation
template to start for yourself with an empty blueprint,
and perhaps even create
your own reference architecture.
The tools on the reference architecture are representative
and can be swapped with what you're using today.
Imagine mapping out your
architecture on those five planes
and co-creating a Golden
Path with your developers.
How exciting would that be?
Did you know that the CNCF also started an
initiative to collect reference architectures?
They might not use the
blueprint with the five planes,
but check them out anyway!
Here's a core truth
about Platforming:
It's not just about the tools, it's about how you organize
and structure your codebase to empower developers.
Thoughtfully structuring
repositories leads to clear ownership,
standardized configurations, and
the grouping of related services.
One (optional) component of the integration and
delivery plane deserves some special attention:
a platform orchestrator. So
let's take our looking glass.
Before we have a close
look at orchestrators,
it's worth noting that the necessity
of a platform orchestrator can vary.
For smaller teams or less
complex environments,
the overhead of implementing and maintaining
an orchestrator might not be just a justified.
In such cases, simpler automation
tools or manual processes might suffice.
The decision to use a platform orchestrator should be based
on the specific needs and complexity of your organization.
For more complex environments,
a platform orchestrator might be a solution for
'the missing middle', as Daniel Bryant calls it.
Looking at these models, this
"middle" seems to have a prominent spot.
But what is this orchestration
middleware? And what problem does it solve?
Daniel Bryant noticed that both developer-centric
top-down and ops-centric bottom-up IDP approaches
have their own pros and cons, and suggests that
orchestration can combine the best of both worlds,
as an abstraction
layer in the middle.
I can hear you thinking:
*another* abstraction layer?
Let's elaborate on that.
This abstraction is
basically a platform API
as a bridge between the developer's interface
(portal, git) and the infrastructure.
No more Infrastructure-as-Code
YAML for developers!
It's time for a renewed look at this Gartner
diagram, now through an orchestration lens.
Conceptually it certainly
makes sense, don't you agree?
Let's dive into a specific problem an orchestrator
can resolve: multiple, ephemeral environments.
A platform orchestrator sits at the core
of a *dynamic* Internal Developer Platform,
enabling *Dynamic Configuration Management*
and developer self-service.
It drives standardization
by design.
Using a platform orchestrator, you
can move away from static setups,
and can now orchestrate deployments
and infrastructure provisioning in harmony.
Configuration baselines let you
drive standardization by design,
abstracting complexity
away from developers,
yet without removing the necessary
context in the delivery workflows.
Instead of having a static
YAML-CI-CD workflow
using YAML files that are
manually localized to the context,
a dynamic approach pulls apart the
environment-specific elements of your configurations
and ties app configs
to infrastructure configs.
The platform orchestrator reads this
*Declarative Application Model* and deploys the application.
Depending on your situation,
the differences between static and dynamic
IDPs might be worth further exploration!
You can start with the reference
resources at the end of this video.
You have already heard the term
'Golden Path' several times now.
Time to explain the concept.
A Golden Path is basically
the answer to the question,
'What is the best way for developers
to do X in our organization?'
Golden or paved paths are
predefined routes in a platform
that outline the best practices, steps, and
required tools to achieve a specific goal.
The golden path should be self-service,
but in the way your developers want.
As we discussed in the
Platform Engineering video,
reducing cognitive load is
crucial for developer productivity.
Golden Paths contribute to this by
providing well-structured pathways
that minimize the mental effort required
to build, deploy, and run applications.
There are many other defintions of Golden Paths available.
I'll share four more of them because
they all emphasize different elements.
'The Golden Path is the sweet spot
between giving developers complete freedom
and putting developers in a cage
for fear they will do something wrong.'
This definition can be
rephrased as a mantra:
'Golden paths over cages.'
Here's another one:
'Golden Paths are ways for
developers to do things by themselves,
but in a way where platform engineers have
baked the organization's standards in.'
This definition emphasizes autonomy (through
self-service) and compliance (standards baked in).
The next definition is from the insightful "Build
Golden Paths for Day 50, Not for Day 1" talk
by Caspar von Grünberg
at PlatformCon 2023.
'Any procedure in the software
development lifecycle a user can follow
with minimal cognitive load
and that drives standardization.'
This one emphasizes
the full SDLC;
Golden Paths aren't
just for Day 1 operations.
If developers follow Golden
Paths, then everybody wins.
IF. Using the platform and
following paths is not a must.
In my upcoming
"Platform-as-a-Product" video,
I'll elaborate on the subject
of compelling platforms.
It's important to balance standardization
with the need for flexibility.
While Golden Paths offer
streamlined and efficient workflows,
developers may occasionally need to deviate from
these paths to address unique challenges or innovate.
A proactive and open attitude towards
these off-path flows can be beneficial.
Instead of viewing
deviations as disruptions,
embrace them as opportunities
for further IDP development.
By actively seeing feedback and
understanding why developers go off-path,
the Platform Team can continuously
improve and adapt the platform
to better meet the
evolving needs of its users.
This approach ensures that the platform
remains both robust and adaptable,
supporting a wide range of developer needs while
maintaining high standards and consistency.
The fourth, or actually fifth,
and last definition is from Spotify,
one of the pioneers
in Platform Engineering.
'The Golden Path is the opinionated
and supported path to build your system
and the Golden Path tutorial
walks you through this path.'
"Opinionated" means standards
and tools are built in as a convention.
"Supported" means the platform team keeps it
working and updated and provides customer support.
This last definition emphasizes the
maintenance and support by the Platform Team,
including a
walk-through tutorial.
In Platform Engineering, the Internal Developer
Platform (IDP) typically comes first as the foundation,
and the Golden Path
is then built on top of it.
The IDP provides the underlying infrastructure,
tools, and capabilities that developers can leverage,
while the Golden Path defines the opinionated, streamlined
workflows or sensible defaults for using the platform effectively.
However, these can
evolve in tandem.
Golden Paths may influence the design of the
IDP by clarifying what developers need most,
and the IDP's capabilities can
expand to support new Golden Paths.
When developing
tutorials for Golden Paths,
it's important to keep in mind
that the primary job of the tutorials
is to walk onboarding engineers
through the Golden Path.
You do have to think about
the way to present the tutorials
in the Developer Control
Plane, in the portal.
Spotify has chosen an approach with one Golden
Path tutorial per engineering discipline.
It doesn't have to
be done this way;
for example, I could imagine
a more modular approach,
with one golden path tutorial
per engineering job-to-be-done.
How can we use Golden
Paths in conversations?
Like with IDPs, it would help us to have a
powerful structure, lingo, and visualizations.
Here's one concept,
shaped by Kratix.
The heart of Kratix, a framework for
building platforms, are so-called Promises.
Via Promises, Platform Engineers can codify their organization's
policies and opinions (security, compliance, etc.)
into the X-as-a-Service
software supply chain,
making it easy and straightforward for application
teams to consume the services via the IDP.
Other orchestrators have similar
concepts with different terminology.
In this video, I use
Kratix as an example
because I love the clear
language of Contracts and Promises,
a lingo that my stakeholders
easily understand.
A Promise is a Contract between
the platform and its users.
It describes a reusable component
with organizational standards built-in.
Designing the right Promise for a single service
allows platforms to be built incrementally.
The value of your platform
increases dramatically
when you offer application
teams tailored Golden Paths.
Creating a Golden Path with a system
based on reusable components is easy.
Decide on, define, and install the
individual Promises that are required,
then define a higher-level Promise that
brings those individual Promises together.
How does this sound: a complete
development environment setup-
networking, integration, security,
governance, compliance, and deployment-
all available on demand.
What do you think of these
easy-to-understand visualizations?
I bet you can use them to kickstart Golden Path
conversations with your teammates or stakeholders!
Gregor Hohpe came up with a beautiful metaphor to describe the
difference between single service and higher-level Promises.
Imagine you have a
basket full of various fruits.
While each fruit has its own value
and can be enjoyed on its own,
the real magic happens when
you combine them into a fruit salad.
A higher-level promise, a
Golden Path, is like that fruit salad.
It takes those individual building blocks and
curates them into a cohesive, integrated experience,
reducing complexity, and ultimately providing
more value than the sum of its parts.
I hope this metaphor can help
you have fruitful conversations!
One more thing...
We started this video with a
tweet from Kelsey Hightower,
stating that 'Kubernetes is a
platform for building platforms.
It's a better place to
start, not the endgame.'
Then we went on a journey
towards the endgame,
but we haven't talked
about our starting place.
See, do you know what's
missing in the IDP blueprint?
The platform itself!
What you see here in
the architectural blueprint
is what's offered to the
platform user, the developers.
The foundation of it, the
platform itself, isn't included.
This makes sense from a
platform user perspective;
remember, they want
to be "platformless"!
However, from a
platform point of view,
it's crucial to visualize the underlying
infrastructure and services that support the IDP.
This helps in understanding
the full scope of the platform
and ensures that all components
are well-integrated and maintained.
In his "Extending the IDP Reference
Architecture" talk at PlatformCon 2024,
Max Körbächer discussed the multiple dimensions
and different perspectives of platforms
and suggested extending the
architecture with what he calls "User Land",
the platform capabilities that form
the foundation that carries the IDPs.
For example, we include
namespace observability in the IDP,
but we also have observability in
place for the platform as a whole.
By extending the architectural blueprint to
include the platform's foundational elements,
we can provide a more comprehensive view that
benefits both developers and Platform Engineers.
This visualization can serve as a valuable reference for
ongoing development, maintenance, and optimization of the IDP.
Another extension Max
Körbächer suggested
is a standardized way to
define platform services.
We've all seen the 'treat your platform as a product'
statements by every leading resource in the industry.
But how can we describe what
this platform product actually is?
More on this in
my upcoming video.
A third and last suggested extension
is from an "Organization" viewpoint.
One could say that "Locations"
would be a more suitable name,
to better align with e.g., the
Operating Model Canvas (OMC),
but an architectural view
from such a perspective
could be an additional layer in our
quest for visualized conversation starters.
We see a similar approach in another Gartner
diagram about the topic of Platform Engineering.
Compared to Max Körbächer's suggestion, this
diagram provides another level of abstraction.
The outer circle includes Data Center Infrastructure,
Edge Infrastructure, and Cloud Infrastructure,
focusing on different locations and their roles
within the Platform Engineering landscape as well.
An IDP blueprint isn't the only
layer at which we can start dialogues.
Do you see value in
other suggested layers?
Do you miss a
dimension or perspective?
One perspective I would
like to add is responsibility.
AWS came up with this so-called
"Shared Responsibility Model".
It helps customers to carefully
consider the services they choose
as the responsibilities vary
depending on the services used.
A high-level IDP architecture
can be a powerful tool
for defining a Shared Responsibility
Model for your platform services.
Here's how: each component becomes
a logical boundary for responsibilities.
It's also possible to define
ownership across planes.
The blueprint also makes explicit which standardized aspects
the platform abstracts (Platform Team's responsibility).
It's even possible to use an
outcome-based dimension
and tie each layer or
feature of the platform
to e.g., reliability,
security, or velocity,
enabling the Shared Responsibility
Model to focus on collective goals
rather than siloed concerns.
An example. For
monitoring and observability,
the shared responsibility
model might look like this:
the Platform Team provides a
centralized logging and metrics solution,
ensures it scales, and
defines standard dashboards;
application/product teams
configure application-specific metrics,
set appropriate alerts, and respond to application-related
incidents ('you build it, you own it');
and a shared responsibility for aligning
SLIs/SLOs, and refining monitoring practices.
Would clear boundaries visualized in a Shared
Responsibility Model help you with your conversations?
Wow, you've made it all the way
to the end of this video. Great job!
You should now be able to explain the concepts
of Internal Developer Portals and Golden Paths,
and how they can enable developers
during the software development lifecycle.
We've seen many different
models with different perspectives,
which we can use in our conversations
with each other and with our stakeholders.
To sum it all up in
an elevator pitch:
Internal Developer Platforms (IDPs) are
transformative tools in Platform Engineering
that streamline software development by automating
key tasks and providing self-service capabilities.
By reducing cognitive load and enabling
developers to focus on meaningful work,
IDPs drive efficiency
and innovation,
ultimately delivering greater
value to the organization.
Embracing the principles of Platform
Engineering and adopting a product mindset
ensures that these platforms continuously
evolve to meet the needs of developers.
Join Luca from platformengineering.org
as he recaps the concept of an IDP for you.
All right. So what is an IDP?
Well, an Internal Developer Platform
is a set of tools and technologies
that a Platform Engineering
team binds into a Golden Path
to enable developer self-service along
the entire lifecycle of an application.
By providing developers with a self-service
option while driving standardization,
IDPs significantly
boost productivity
through a reduction in
waiting time, distraction,
or just manual work
for operation teams.
A recent benchmarking study we
did on Platform Engineering has shown
that IDPs are the
single biggest driver
to help an organization
innovate faster
and slash time to market.
There is no one-size-fits-all for IDPs.
The platform at a large
retailer in the States
will differ widely from the
platform at a startup in Berlin.
But there are still clear patterns
in the design of modern IDPs
and they can be divided
and described by five planes.
The exact designs of those planes
differs by organizational preference.
First, we have the
Developer Control Plane,
which clusters the primary interface
developers can choose to use
when interacting
with the platform.
Such an interface could be
a workload specification for a
fully code-based interaction,
a developer portal
for a UI-based view,
or an API or CLI.
The Integration Delivery Plane
contains the flow of a request
from the interface all the way
through to the running application
with all its
configured resources.
It includes CI pipelines,
a platform orchestrator,
maybe a dedicated CD system,
and sometimes dedicated
Infrastructure Control Planes.
The Resource Plane encompasses
all cloud and on-prem resources.
This includes compute,
databases, file storage, or DNS.
The Security Plane includes policy
layers and secrets management,
and the Observability Plane
logging and APM functionality.
If you're a developer
developing your application
with a state-of-the-art
Internal Developer Platform,
you should be able to
self-serve everything you need
to build, deploy, and operate
your application and resources.
It's important to point out
that this goes way beyond
the creation phase of a service.
While well-crafted platforms
treat every single deployment
like day zero and create application and infrastructure
configurations dynamically with every Git push.
This ensures consistency
and standardization
across the entire life
cycle of your application.
Well-designed IDPs follow a
Platform-as-a-Product approach
where a Platform Team builds,
maintains, and continuously improves
the IDP using product management
principles and best practices.
So why would you need
an IDP in the first place?
Most organizations already have an IDP.
Actually, whether they realize it or not.
The question is whether it's a
scalable, enterprise-grade IDP.
A modern IDP ensures
standardization by design,
enables developer self-service, and
reduces cognitive load on developers.
It can help organizations
innovate faster,
shorten time to market,
increase revenue growth,
and improve customer
satisfaction and retention.
Thank you for watching!
I hope you found this session
insightful and engaging.
If you have any questions or would like to discuss platforms
and Platform Engineering further, feel free to reach out.
Your feedback and thoughts are
always welcome and appreciated.
Stay tuned for my upcoming
video on Platform-as-a-Product,
where we'll dive deeper into how adopting a product mindset can
enhance the effectiveness of your Internal Developer Platform.
We'll explore how this approach ensures that
platforms are not only technically robust,
but also user-centric and continuously
evolving to meet developer needs.
I look forward to seeing
you in future videos!
Thank you for sticking
around to the end.
The remainder of this video contains
an overview of all resources used.
There's some great stuff out there, often
with references to even more great stuff.
Are you ready to go
down this rabbit hole?